---
title: pandoc
author: mohwa
toc-title: 목차
---

<!-- Do not edit this file.  It is generated automatically from
README.template and MANUAL.txt via the command:
pandoc --lua-filter tools/update-readme.lua README.template -o README.md
-->

# Pandoc

## The universal markup converter

<div id="description">

Pandoc is a [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org) library for converting
from one markup format to another, and a command-line tool that uses
this library.

Pandoc can read
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/),
[CommonMark](http://commonmark.org), [PHP Markdown
Extra](https://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/extra/),
[GitHub-Flavored
Markdown](https://help.github.com/articles/github-flavored-markdown/),
[MultiMarkdown](http://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/), and (subsets
of) [Textile](http://redcloth.org/textile),
[reStructuredText](http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/introduction.html),
[HTML](http://www.w3.org/html/), [LaTeX](http://latex-project.org),
[MediaWiki markup](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Formatting),
[TWiki markup](http://twiki.org/cgi-bin/view/TWiki/TextFormattingRules),
[TikiWiki
markup](https://doc.tiki.org/Wiki-Syntax-Text#The_Markup_Language_Wiki-Syntax),
[Creole 1.0](http://www.wikicreole.org/wiki/Creole1.0), [Haddock
markup](https://www.haskell.org/haddock/doc/html/ch03s08.html),
[OPML](http://dev.opml.org/spec2.html), [Emacs Org
mode](http://orgmode.org), [DocBook](http://docbook.org),
[JATS](https://jats.nlm.nih.gov),
[Muse](https://amusewiki.org/library/manual),
[txt2tags](http://txt2tags.org), [Vimwiki](https://vimwiki.github.io),
[EPUB](http://idpf.org/epub),
[ODT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument), and [Word
docx](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_Open_XML).

Pandoc can write plain text,
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/),
[CommonMark](http://commonmark.org), [PHP Markdown
Extra](https://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/extra/),
[GitHub-Flavored
Markdown](https://help.github.com/articles/github-flavored-markdown/),
[MultiMarkdown](http://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/),
[reStructuredText](http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/introduction.html),
[XHTML](http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/),
[HTML5](http://www.w3.org/TR/html5/), [LaTeX](http://latex-project.org)
(including [`beamer`](https://ctan.org/pkg/beamer) slide shows),
[ConTeXt](http://www.contextgarden.net/),
[RTF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rich_Text_Format),
[OPML](http://dev.opml.org/spec2.html), [DocBook](http://docbook.org),
[JATS](https://jats.nlm.nih.gov),
[OpenDocument](http://opendocument.xml.org),
[ODT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument), [Word
docx](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_Open_XML), [GNU
Texinfo](http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/), [MediaWiki
markup](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Formatting), [DokuWiki
markup](https://www.dokuwiki.org/dokuwiki), [ZimWiki
markup](http://zim-wiki.org/manual/Help/Wiki_Syntax.html), [Haddock
markup](https://www.haskell.org/haddock/doc/html/ch03s08.html),
[EPUB](http://idpf.org/epub) (v2 or v3),
[FictionBook2](http://www.fictionbook.org/index.php/Eng:XML_Schema_Fictionbook_2.1),
[Textile](http://redcloth.org/textile), [groff
man](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/groff_man.7.html), [groff
ms](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/groff_ms.7.html), [Emacs Org
mode](http://orgmode.org),
[AsciiDoc](http://www.methods.co.nz/asciidoc/), [InDesign
ICML](http://wwwimages.adobe.com/www.adobe.com/content/dam/acom/en/devnet/indesign/sdk/cs6/idml/idml-cookbook.pdf),
[TEI Simple](https://github.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple),
[Muse](https://amusewiki.org/library/manual),
[PowerPoint](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_PowerPoint) slide
shows and [Slidy](http://www.w3.org/Talks/Tools/Slidy/),
[Slideous](http://goessner.net/articles/slideous/),
[DZSlides](http://paulrouget.com/dzslides/),
[reveal.js](http://lab.hakim.se/reveal-js/) or
[S5](http://meyerweb.com/eric/tools/s5/) HTML slide shows. It can also
produce [PDF](https://www.adobe.com/pdf/) output on systems where LaTeX,
ConTeXt, `pdfroff`, `wkhtmltopdf`, `prince`, or `weasyprint` is
installed.

Pandoc’s enhanced version of Markdown includes syntax for tables,
definition lists, metadata blocks, `Div` blocks, footnotes and
citations, embedded LaTeX (including math), Markdown inside HTML block
elements, and much more. These enhancements, described further under
Pandoc’s Markdown, can be disabled using the `markdown_strict` format.

Pandoc has a modular design: it consists of a set of readers, which
parse text in a given format and produce a native representation of the
document (like an *abstract syntax tree* or AST), and a set of writers,
which convert this native representation into a target format. Thus,
adding an input or output format requires only adding a reader or
writer. Users can also run custom [pandoc
filters](http://pandoc.org/filters.html) to modify the intermediate AST.

Because pandoc’s intermediate representation of a document is less
expressive than many of the formats it converts between, one should not
expect perfect conversions between every format and every other. Pandoc
attempts to preserve the structural elements of a document, but not
formatting details such as margin size. And some document elements, such
as complex tables, may not fit into pandoc’s simple document model.
While conversions from pandoc’s Markdown to all formats aspire to be
perfect, conversions from formats more expressive than pandoc’s Markdown
can be expected to be lossy.

</div>

## Installing

Here’s [how to install pandoc](INSTALL.md).

## Documentation

Pandoc’s website contains a full [User’s
Guide](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html). It is also available
[here](MANUAL.txt) as pandoc-flavored Markdown. The website also
contains some [examples of the use of
pandoc](https://pandoc.org/demos.html) and a limited [online
demo](https://pandoc.org/try).

## Contributing

Pull requests, bug reports, and feature requests are welcome. Please
make sure to read [the contributor guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) before
opening a new issue.

## License

© 2006-2018 John MacFarlane (jgm@berkeley.edu). Released under the
[GPL](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html "GNU General Public License"),
version 2 or greater. This software carries no warranty of any kind.
(See COPYRIGHT for full copyright and warranty notices.)
